It is remarkable how the history of virtual space mimics that of its physical counterpart. Like the universe's big bang, better yet, the earth's tectonic shifts, our once one and only internet has shattered into many pieces. To lead with the bad news: no attempt to glue its pieces back together will ever mend it into a whole again. But the fact that something is broken does not mean that it is worth-less. Changing our relation to fragments and waste is key to our planetary future. So why exclude the internet from our new found consciousness?

In her seminal [Atlas of AI](https://katecrawford.net/atlas) (2021), Kate Crawford shows that mining and extraction are the foundational cultural techniques of the tech industry. Examples that underline her thesis can be found high and low. From the 10x mindset of venture capital, the dehumanizing crunches of the game industry, to the e-waste burial lakes of Baotou, so-called innovation always comes at the expense of nature, people, and most frequently both. Value is produced by disposing more than is kept. And now that we have almost completely exploited our own planet, outer space has become the next frontier.

> Extreme wealth and power generated from technology companies now enables a small group of men to pursue their own private space race. They depend on exploiting the knowledge and infrastructures of the public space programs of the twentieth century and often rely on government funding an tax incentives as well. Their aim is not to limit extraction and growth, but to extend it across the solar system.

— Kate Crawford

Fortunately, the age of exploitation is finally running out of steam. The world's [precarious reliance on Taiwan](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2021-01-25/the-world-is-dangerously-dependent-on-taiwan-for-semiconductors) for its high-end semiconductors, goverments' and big-tech's resort to [surveillance capitalism](https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2019/03/harvard-professor-says-surveillance-capitalism-is-undermining-democracy/) to maintain the last semblance of control, and, of course, humanities' looming fear for extinction due to climate change are all signs that the times are about to turn. Rather than delaying the inevitable, however, I believe that we should give it a final push.

In this upcoming series of articles, I will examine the case of internet fragmentation to develop a new practice called [ecosystem architecture](/series/ecosystem-architecture). In biology, an ecosystem is tied to a specific time and place. Up until this very day, these etymological origins have shaped and constrained its transferred conceptual meaning. But contemporary artistic, societal and business ecosystems transcend the mere contingent. Parallel to the rise and shattering of the web, the last few decades has seen an explosion of possibilities to create networks, ventures, and communities that are distributed and asynchronous. But this dispersion also made it clear that healthy non-natural ecosystems do not just organically come into fruition and thrive. They do need to be designed and groomed, but in an unforced, open-ended manner.

Ecosystem architecture draws inspiration from many sources: philosophy, gender studies, coding, spirituality, music, dance, visual arts, media theory to name a few. While this mix may seem eclectic or even erratic, there is actually reason to the madness. Natural ecosystems thrive on biodiversity and so do their conceptual antipodes. In order to tackle the challenges ahead of us, no single discipline or practice possesses all the knowledge and wisdom needed. And since ecosystems are wild and eclectic, so are their theoretical underpinnings. 

This series positions ecosystem architecture on the intersection between two specific, adjacent practices: those of [decentralization](https://davidphelps.substack.com/p/visualizing-decentralization) and [regenerative design](https://medium.com/@zahara_chetty/designing-for-the-future-9-principles-of-regenerative-design-568c8966f857).

Decentralization has undeniably been the motor of the late twentieth and early twenty-first century economy. The rise of many Asian countries to economic power houses would not have happened if the US and Europe had not displace their manufacturing oversees. The contemporary internet economy fully depends on the global open source movement delivering high quality software. While technically not the same, globalization inevitably leads to decentralization. When economic, political, and cultural activities are dispersed over time and space, new modes of control and coordination are an absolute must.

Waste generation and accumulation are the shadow side of these modern distributed modes of production. From the [early Frankfurt School](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6356218-grand-hotel-abgrund-eine-photobiographie-der-frankfurter-schule), [the Club of Rome](https://www.clubofrome.org/publication/the-limits-to-growth/), up until the current day [climate movement](https://waag.org/en/article/chris-julien-nieuwsuur-ai-devours-electricity/), the drive for innovation has been equated to the excess mindset. Weirdly enough, that is one of the few thing that eco-warriors and venture capitalists fully agree on. In order to innovate, you need to produce large quantities of trash. I hold, however, that both sides have been looking at it the wrong way. Innovation is not a quality of the technological artifact but rather of the practice that produces it. 

It is in this practical notion of innovation that decentralized and regenerative design meet. Regeneration goes beyond sustainability by not only aiming to restore, but also to renew and revitalize systems and communities. Whereas sustainable design aims for damage control by mitigating harm, regenerative design wants to make ecosystems healthier and more vibrant than ever before. From the perspective of regeneration, the fragments of the internet become seeds of a promising future rather than remainders of a paradise lost. Wabi-sabi and Kintsugi, rather than perfection and wholeness, are key to a better future. Ecosystem architecture thus embraces these and related practices wholeheartedly.
