It is remarkable how the history of virtual space mimics that of its physical counterpart. Like the universe's big bang, or better yet, the earth's tectonic shifts, our once one and only internet has shattered into many pieces. To lead with the bad news: no attempt to glue its pieces back together will ever mend it into a whole again. But the fact that something is broken does not mean that it is worthless. Changing our relation to fragments and waste is key to our planetary future. So why exclude the internet from our newfound consciousness?

This insight is key to the practice of ecosystem architecture. Just as natural ecosystems thrive on diversity and complex interdependencies, our digital ecosystems must embrace fragmentation and diversity as opportunities for growth and innovation rather than as obstacles to overcome. This perspective encourages us to see the internet not as a monolithic entity to be restored but as a dynamic ecosystem to be nurtured and evolved.

While the existence and dangers of the Chinese and Russian internet are widely known and debated, the prevalence of this discourse obscures the fact that our 'normal' internet experience has been far from the norm globally for quite a while. In most Asian countries, so-called superapps have replaced browsers and apps as the primary way to interact with the web. Africa is pioneering the adoption of mesh and peer-to-peer networks that creatively give (some form of) internet access to people who cannot afford or rely on stable and persistent connections. Finally, even our own mobile app store ecosystems should be understood as a break from the open global web, which itself thus needs to be further predicated: let's call it the OG internet for now.

This fragmentation, rather than being a sign of failure, can be viewed through the lens of ecosystem architecture. Different regions and communities have developed unique solutions and adaptations, much like various species in an ecosystem. These adaptations make the global internet ecosystem more resilient and diverse, capable of surviving and thriving in varied environments.

Internet fragmentation goes as far back as the browser wars of the mid-1990s. And it would not be far-fetched to argue that the divide between academic (ARPANET) and defense (DARPANET) purposes may be the internet's original split. Around 2013, virtual continental drift turned into a maelstrom when Edward Snowden spilled the tea on government surveillance. Following a study from the World Economic Forum published in 2016, it is now customary to differentiate between three kinds of internet fragmentation. To quote their report directly:

**Technical Fragmentation**: Conditions in the underlying infrastructure that impede the ability of systems to fully interoperate and exchange data packets and of the Internet to function consistently at all endpoints.

**Governmental Fragmentation**: Government policies and actions that constrain or prevent certain uses of the Internet to create, distribute, or access information resources.

**Commercial Fragmentation**: Business practices that constrain or prevent certain uses of the Internet to create, distribute, or access information resources.

On all three of these fronts, the Internet Society (ISOC) has put tremendous effort into making these concerns actionable and putting them on the political agenda. Its aim is to 'connect the unconnected' by fostering a more connected and interoperable online environment. Through initiatives aimed at promoting open standards, ISOC has played a pivotal role in ensuring that diverse systems can seamlessly communicate and exchange data packets. By advocating for a cohesive and globally accessible internet, the organization has contributed to overcoming technical barriers that could impede the internet's functioning across different endpoints. Most importantly, the Internet Society has been instrumental in facilitating collaborative efforts among stakeholders, encouraging the development and adoption of protocols that enhance compatibility.

Ecosystem architecture in this context means acknowledging and designing for the multiplicity of user experiences, technological infrastructures, and regulatory environments. It requires us to move beyond the nostalgia for the OG internet and instead focus on creating a resilient and inclusive digital ecosystem that can adapt to changing conditions and needs.

Alas, when mainstream media and public intellectuals assimilate the issue of internet fragmentation, a lot of the nuance and pragmatism gets lost in translation. More precisely, the status quo centers its narrative on restoring the OG Internet. It focuses on what the web was rather than on what it can be. Proponents of this restorative stance can be roughly divided into three camps:

**Past Dwellers**: Pioneers who have a strong investment in, and are highly nostalgic for, the internet's early days. They consider the web's inception as an exemplary moment in history when free and open global discourse was, and could have stayed, a reality.

**Power Mongers**: Stakeholders whose (geo)political power can be challenged, stabilized, or expanded through control of the internet. These are mainly countries located in the Global North.

**Gold Diggers**: Parties that benefit economically from the OG internet. This camp mostly consists of companies that provide 'free' services that are paid for with data.

Underlying the rhetoric of all these manifestations of the restorative stance is a highly idealized version of the early internet. Whereas the past dwellers genuinely believe this origin story, power mongers and gold diggers cynically appropriate it to further their agenda. Nonetheless, it is not misappropriation that is problematic about the internet's origin story. It is the narrative itself.

A critical reflection of the OG Internet's promises, the conditions under which this assumed historical exception could appear, and the reasons for its quick demise, is long overdue. But this is neither the place nor the time for that evaluation. For current purposes, the executive summary needs to suffice: the digital city was only inhabitable for those fortunate enough to be born in the right village, the information superhighway only took us to destinations that we wanted to see. And as long as that privilege was kept implicit, the OG internet could be a place of civil and peaceful discourse.

As soon as the rest of the world got access to the web, the clash of civilizations immediately turned into a full-blown culture war. If anything, the internet's short history has made it crystal clear that open access to all information does not lead to universal consensus, trust, and understanding. Quite the opposite, it has led to an explosion of propaganda, fake news, and identity politics. In short, the OG internet never lived up to its original promise. It rendered our differences visible but did little to align them.

The future of the internet, like any thriving ecosystem, lies in fostering connections that enhance mutual growth and understanding. By adopting principles of ecosystem architecture, we can design a digital world that is more resilient, inclusive, and adaptive to the needs of all its inhabitants. This means not only acknowledging the fragmented reality but also leveraging it to build a more robust and dynamic internet for the future.
